



A Review of Cybersecurity Incidents in the Water Sector



Amin Hassanzadeh, PhD1, Amin Rasekh, PhD2, Stefano Galelli, PhD3, Mohsen Aghashahi,

MSc4, Riccardo Taormina, PhD5, Avi Ostfeld, PhD6, and M. Katherine Banks, PhD7


1R&D Principal, Accenture Labs, Cyber Fusion Center, 800 North Glebe Road, Arlington, VA.

Email: amin.hassanzadeh@accenture.com

2Industry Advisor, Zachry Department of Civil Engineering, Texas A&M University, 400 Bizzell

St, College Station, TX 77843.

3Assistant Professor, Pillar of Engineering Systems and Design, Singapore University of

Technology and Design, 8 Somapah Rd., Singapore 487372, Singapore.

4Doctoral Student, Zachry Department of Civil Engineering, Texas A&M University, 400 Bizzell

St, College Station, TX 77843.

5Assistant Professor, Department of Water Management, Faculty of Civil Engineering and

Geosciences, Delft University of Technology, Stevinweg 1, 2628 CN Delft, the Netherlands.

6Professor, Faculty of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Technion–Israel Institute of

Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel.

7Professor, College of Engineering, Texas A&M University, 400 Bizzell St, College Station, TX

77843.




ABSTRACT

This study presents a critical review of disclosed, documented, and malicious cybersecurity in-

cidents in the water sector to inform safeguarding eﬀorts against cybersecurity threats. The review

is presented within a technical context of industrial control system architectures, attack-defense

models, and security solutions. Fifteen incidents have been selected and analyzed through a search

strategy that included a variety of public information sources ranging from federal investigation



Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

reports to scientiﬁc papers. For each individual incident, the situation, response, remediation, and

lessons learned are compiled and described. The ﬁndings of this review indicate an increase in the

frequency, diversity, and complexity of cyber-threats to the water sector. While the emergence of

new threats, such as ransomware or cryptojacking, is observed, a recurrence of similar vulnera-

bilities and threats, such as insider threats, is also evident, emphasizing the need for an adaptive,

cooperative, and comprehensive approach to water cyber-defense.


INTRODUCTION

The Water and Wastewater Sector (WWS) is considered by the U.S. Department of Homeland

Security(DHS)asoneofthemaintargetsforcyber-attacksamongstthesixteenlifelineinfrastructure

sectors (White House 2013).  Its safeguard against cybersecurity threats is considered a matter of

national priority (White House 2017). From 2012 to 2015, WWS received the highest number of

assessments from the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency-Industrial Control Systems

(ICS-CERT 2016b), which routinely conducts on-site cybersecurity assessments for several critical

infrastructure sectors (ICS-CERT 2016b).   The only exception was 2014, when the number of

assessments in the energy sector was slightly higher (ICS-CERT 2016b).

According to ICS-CERT (ICS-CERT 2016b), 25 water utilities reported cybersecurity incidents

in 2015, making WWS the third most targeted sector.  Since there are over 151,000 public water

systems in the United States (USEPA 2019a), one may conclude that cybersecurity risk in WWS

is extremely low and most systems are secure.  However, the reality is that many cybersecurity

incidents either go undetected, and consequently unreported (Walton 2016), or are not disclosed—

as doing so may jeopardize the victim’s reputation, customers’ trust, and, consequently, revenues

(Cava 2018; Rubin 2019).   Moreover, the complexity and impact of cyber-originated incidents

can be as serious as the incidents initiated from the Operational Technology (OT) area.   Most

industrial sectors, and WWS in particular, are now embracing the digital age, but still lack dedicated

cybersecurity specialists to provide customized guidelines for security programs, secure systems,

and train employees.

Recently, cybersecurity has piqued the interest and attention of the WWS industry and policy-


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

makingentities. SeveraleducationalprogramshavebeenoﬀeredbytheUSEPA,DHS,theAmerican

Water Works Association, and the Water Information Sharing & Analysis Center over the past few

years to raise awareness, train staﬀ, and provide resources and tools to assist with cybersecurity

practices (WaterISAC 2015; ICS-CERT 2019; USEPA 2019b).  This has been accompanied by

a rising interest in the research community (Amin et al. 2013; Rasekh et al. 2016; Ahmed et al.

2017; Formby et al. 2017; Taormina et al. 2017; Laszka et al. 2017; Taormina et al. 2018; Chandy

et al. 2018; Taormina and Galelli 2018; Housh and Ohar 2018; Ramotsoela et al. 2019).  Within

this respect, there may exist valuable lessons and insights in the past cybersecurity incidents that

shouldbediscoveredanddisseminatedtoinformtheongoingcyber-defenseinvestmentsandeﬀorts,

thereby enhancing their relevance and eﬀectiveness.  This requires a comprehensive compilation

and review of the these incidents; a public resource that is not currently available.

This study conducted by the EWRI Task Committee on Cyber-physical Security of Water

Distribution Systems, presents a review of disclosed, documented, and malicious cybersecurity

incidents in WWS to inform safeguarding eﬀorts against cybersecurity threats. First, a review of a

typical industrial control system architecture, standard models, and common practices, alongside

security controls and solutions oﬀered for these environments, is provided.  This is followed by a

description of attack-defense models, an important concept in the design of cybersecurity systems.

Next, a selection of cyber incidents in WWS is presented. The main details regarding the situation,

response, remediation, and lessons learned are reported for each incident.  This review concludes

with recommendations for industry, policy-makers, and research community.


INDUSTRIAL CONTROL NETWORKS

In order to provide context for the analysis of the incidents, this section reviews traditional OT

networks, their integration with Information Technology (IT) networks, and standard architecture

designs proposed for ICS networks. We will refer to these architectures when reviewing some of the

incidents and map theattacker’s activities to the architectural layers andtargeted hardware/software.

ICS networks traditionally uses a system of hardware and software components—called Su-

pervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)—for process control, data collection, system


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

monitoring, communication with industrial devices, and log data storing.  A typical SCADA sys-

tem architecture is depicted in Figure 1a: the lowest level generally consists of ﬁeld elements (also

called end or dumb devices), such as sensors, pumps, and actuators. These elements are operated

by control devices, such as Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC) and Remote Terminal Units

(RTU). PLCs and RTUs are microcomputers that send control signals to the ﬁeld elements, acquire

data, and transmit them to the central control station, such as a Master Terminal Unit (MTU). MTU

and RTUs/PLCs communicate and function in a master/slave model (through wired or wireless

networks, public telephone network, or even through the internet) to send commands, upload new

conﬁgurations, and monitor the ﬁeld elements.   Operators manage all these operations through

a Human Machine Interface (HMI) connected to the MTU that allows them to gather data, send

commands to remote sites, and change settings and conﬁgurations (Krutz 2005).

Figure 1b shows a typical water system architecture with RTUs and PLCs geographically-

dispersed in diﬀerent sites.   We have mapped diﬀerent layers of a SCADA architecture to this

sample network, where ﬁeld elements, such as valves or pressure gauges, are monitored by RTUs

with wireless antennas.   The SCADA servers are located in a central control station (e.g., the

headquarters of a water utility) and remotely communicate with the RTUs and PLCS scattered in

the entire service area (SWAN Forum Interoperability Workgroup 2016).

Formanyyears, SCADAsystems, and, ingeneral, OTnetworksinindustrialenvironments, were

air-gapped—that is, not connected to corporate IT networks or internet.  However, as technology

advanced,  many organizations planned to consolidate overlapping IT and OT networks.   This

approach aims at saving maintenance costs and integrating data collection and analysis (Krutz

2005).   However,  such integration comes at high security risks due to the following reasons:

1) OT networks have diﬀerent operational priorities compared to IT networks—e.g., availability

vs.  conﬁdentiality—and one model may not ﬁt both; 2) Most ICS devices and protocols are not

designedtosupportsecurityfeatureslikedataencryptionoraccesscontrol,andoftensupportremote

access through radio modems; 3) Expensive legacy devices in ICS environments provide limited

visualization options to implement and evaluate security modiﬁcations; and, 4) Critical and real-



Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

time business operations in OT, along with safety regulations, prevent immediate implementation

of remediation options that may require system interruptions. In light of the above, security experts

have proposed some work-around options to limit the access of users to the OT network.  Other

eﬀortsintheICSsecurityﬁeldareconstantlyimprovingstandards, protocols, anddevicestosupport

security features.

The new generation of converged IT-OT networks in industrial control systems, also referred to

as Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), is no longer air-gapped. Figure 1c depicts a typical integrated

ICS network consisting of multiple levels and zones, also known as the Industrial Automation and

Control Systems (IACS) Security standard (ISA-62443) (Krutz 2005).  A zone is in fact a set of

assets (IT or OT devices) grouped together to provide a subclass of services and applications for

the entire ICS network. The main zones can be described as follows:


•   Enterprise Zone that includes assets for business logistics and enterprise systems, repre-

senting Level 4 and 5, respectively. This zone is also known as IT network.

•   Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) that separates IT and OT networks, thus preventing direct

access to OT devices from the IT network.  All corporate–accessible services (e.g., web,

email) reside in this zone.

•   Manufacturing Zone and Control Zone.   The former refers to the entire OT domain,

including Levels 0, 1, 2, and 3; the latter refers to Levels 0, 1, and 2, so it is equivalent to

the traditional ICS architecture shown in Figure 1a.  Level 3 provides site-level operation

and asset management. Plant historian, production scheduling and reporting, patch and ﬁle

services reside at Level 3 (Hassanzadeh et al. 2015).


ATTACK AND DEFENSE MODELS

The incidents reviewed in this paper can be comprehended more eﬀectively with some knowl-

edge of attack and defense models, which are introduced next.







Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

Attack models

From the attacker’s perspective, a systematic process consisting of several steps or individual

malicious activities is required to obtain the desired eﬀect on the victim’s network.   Lockheed

Martin researchers have expanded the kill chain concept used in military applications to deﬁne the

Cyber Kill Chain (CKC) (Hutchins et al. 2011), which models the life cycle of an attack based on

the fact that the adversary uses a series of malicious activities (also called intrusions or single-step

attack) and adjusts each step based on the success or failure of the previous step.  CKC steps are

deﬁnedasreconnaissance, weaponization, delivery, exploitation, installation, commandandcontrol

(C2), and actions on objectives.  Inspired by the CKC model, researchers have proposed several

attack life cycle models that are reviewed and discussed in Hassanzadeh and Burkett (2018).

In industrial environments, the attack life cycle is slightly diﬀerent because of the diﬀerent

architecture design shown in Figure 1c. The target in such networks can be an asset in one of the

three domains, namely, IT, DMZ, or OT. However, in most reported ICS incidents, the target is an

OT asset (Hassanzadeh et al. 2015), since the attacker gains access to the victim’s environment

through the IT domain and then traverse to the OT infrastructure by launching multiple attacks.

This model is deﬁned as the ICS Kill Chain, a multi-domain, multi-step approach that considers

ISA-62443 architectural levels and CKC steps together.   Since the attacker may need to repeat

several CKC steps at each IT/OT level to laterally move within the network from one asset to

another (until he/she reaches the target), Hassanzadeh and Burkett (2018) proposed a spiral attack

model to accurately describe the attacker’s activities within the converged IT/OT systems. Figure

2a shows a simpliﬁed version of this model, which is color-coded to map it to the IT/DMZ/OT

domains of Figure 1c.  As depicted, an attacker may start with some reconnaissance activities in

outer layers of an organization that are more exposed to the public (e.g., web server, mail server),

and then ﬁnd a vulnerable host that can be exploited. Once the ﬁrst attack is delivered and executed,

the attacker is already inside the victim’s network, and then escalates his/her privileges and move

laterally within the network towards the ﬁnal target, which is placed in the lower levels. Note that

this is a generic model, so there might be attacks that do not necessarily start from Level 5—such



Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

as an insider that uses OT workstations or a vulnerable server in the DMZ to launch an attack.

In light of the fact that an attacker operates in a chain of events (i.e., a set of single-step

intrusions), the diamond model of intrusion analysis proposes a formal method called “activity

thread” (Caltagirone et al. 2013).   The method shows not only the attacker’s steps and causal

relation between them, but also a complete list of features for each of these steps. Figure 2b shows

the core and meta features of each single-step intrusion, or event. An activity thread in an industrial

environment is a directed graph (like the spiral set of arches in Figure 2a), where each vertex is an

event/intrusion (see Figure 2b) and links represent the relation between those intrusions from the

ﬁrst step of the attack to the ﬁnal target. As shown in Figure 2b, the four core features describe how

an adversary deploys a capability over some infrastructure against a victim.  Let us further focus

on these features:


•   Adversary is the actor or organization responsible for the attack.  The adversary can be

categorized as insider or outsider and individual, group, or organization.  This is usually

an unknown feature in most cyber-attacks.   It is important to understand the distinction

between adversary operator (i.e., the actual hacker) and adversary customer (i.e., the entity

that beneﬁts from the attack).

•   Capabilityisthesetoftoolsandtechniquesthatareusedbytheattacker. Thevulnerabilities

and conﬁguration issues in the target environment deﬁne the capability of an attacker.

•   Infrastructure is the physical and/or logical communication structure, such as email ad-

dresses or USB devices, used by the attacker to deliver the attack capabilities, maintain

control over them, and ﬁnally obtain results. The infrastructure can be owned or controlled

by the attacker or an intermediary (e.g., zombies hosts, botnets, or compromised email

accounts).

•   Victim is the target that has vulnerabilities and conﬁguration issues to provide attack

capabilities for the adversary. Victims are either persona (e.g., people or organizations) or

assets (e.g., networks, systems, accounts, or information).




Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

In addition to the core features, there exist six meta-features in every security event: 1) times-

tamp, that is, the start and stop time of the intrusion; 2) phase, or step, describing the position

of the intrusion in the entire attack kill chain; 3) direction, which denotes the course of an attack

(for example, data exﬁltration has a victim-to-infrastructure direction, while probing goes from the

adversary to the infrastructure); 4) result, which indicates the status of an attack, such as success,

failure, or unknown; 5) resources, such as software, hardware, information, knowledge, funds, etc.;

and, 6) methodology, that is, the class of the malicious activity, such as spear-phishing or denial-

of-service.  Moreover, four expanded-meta features have also been used to describe a single-step

intrusion: detection method, showing what tools or techniques were used in detecting the malicious

activity; data source to detect it; detection signature, or rule, that was used for the detection; and,

author, namely the analyst-author of the intrusion.  Several multi-step attack examples and their

activity threads are presented in Caltagirone et al. (2013).

Defense models

To secure target organizations, defenders can employ several security tools and technologies.

Moreover, they may have access to standards, threat intelligence databases, security controls, and

benchmarks.   Nonetheless, developing and implementing a thorough security strategy is a very

challenging task that requires prioritization and rigour.   The Center for Internet Security (CIS)

proposed a list of the most fundamental and valuable security actions called “CIS Controls” that

every organization should consider (CIS 2019). These controls are categorized as:


•   Basic Controls, such as inventory and control of hardware/software assets, continuous

vulnerability management, or controlled use of administrative privileges;

•   Foundational Controls, such as email and web browser protections, malware defenses, or

secure conﬁguration for network devices like ﬁrewalls, routers, and switches;

•   Organizational Controls, such as the implementation of a security awareness and training

program, incident response and management, penetration tests, and red team exercises.


Table 1 provides the complete list of CIS controls along with their corresponding category.


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

These controls are available and oﬀered in diﬀerent security tools and solutions.  They can have

variousimpactsdependingontheirgoalandimplementation: 1)detect theattack; 2)denyorprevent

the attacker from accessing assets or information; 3) disrupt active malicious activities; 4) degrade

the impact of an attack; 5) deceive the attacker; or, 6) contain the malicious activity to a zone where

damages can be mitigated.  Figure 3 shows how diﬀerent security controls (tools and solutions)

can be used to protect an organization against an intrusion attempt at each CKC step (Hutchins

et al. 2011; Bodeau et al. 2013; Willson 2013). As an example, network-based intrusion detection

systems (NIDS), host-based intrusion detection systems (HIDS), or anti-virus (AV) solutions can

be used to detect exploitation activities.   Similarly, trust zones can contain malicious activities

associated with multiple attack steps from delivery to action, and honeypots can deceive attackers

during several attack phases.  AV solutions are mostly used to detect or disrupt attacks during the

delivery, exploitation, or installation phase, while data execution protection (DEP) techniques are

mostly used as a disruption mechanism.

In addition to traditional IT-based security controls, there exist several OT-speciﬁc security

controls—such as data-diode and unidirectional gateway, in-line command white listing, passive

asset discovery, passive OT intrusion detection (or anomaly detection), or patch and compliance

management—that are currently used in industrial networks.   A closer look at these solutions

shows that they also fall under the categories mentioned above; however, they are designed to be

compatible with OT network protocols and standards. For example, unidirectional gateway ensures

a limited (if not zero) network interaction from the IT to the OT domain that should be considered

as a ﬁrewall with a very restricted communication rule consistent with the OT architecture and

its security needs.  Hence, this OT-speciﬁc security control is a boundary defense control listed

in Table 1.  Similarly, passive asset discovery in OT networks is a basic security control to create

an inventory of authorized and unauthorized devices (ﬁrst control in Table 1).  A technical report

published by the Department of Energy (Department of Energy 2005) lists 21 actions that can

increase the security of SCADA networks.  Each action corresponds to one or multiple security

controls listed here.



Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

INCIDENTS

In this review, a cybersecurity incident refers to an incident that has been maliciously launched

from the cyber space to cause adverse consequences to a target entity.  All available reports on

disclosed, documented, and malicious cybersecurity incidents in WWS happened until the end of

May 2019 were considered, but only the incidents with detailed and veriﬁed information were then

selected. Theinformationsourcesincludereportspublishedbygovernmentorganizations, scientiﬁc

papers, internal reports from aﬀected utilities, and media coverage that reported interviews with the

involved oﬃcial representatives. The authors of this review did not conduct any direct investigation

themselves.  The review is not restricted to any particular geographic region.  All incidents, here

presented in chronological order, are true positives, with the exception of one incident.  This was

included due to the massive, negative cry-wolf eﬀects it created in the aftermath of its disclosure.

For each incident, we describe the situation, response/recovery (if available), and lessons learned.

1. Maroochy Water Services, Australia, 2000

Incident

Maroochy Shire is located about 100 kilometres north of Brisbane in the Sunshine Coast region

of Queensland, Australia.  It has a population of nearly 120,000 inhabitants and a gravity sewage

collection and treatment system that processes an average of 35 million liters of sewage each day.

During the period 1997–2000, Hunter Watertech Pty Ltd (HWT), a third-party contractor, installed

PDS Compact 500 RTUs at all 142 sewage pumping stations.  This enabled to remotely control

and monitor the pumps through a SCADA system.   In late January 2000, the SCADA started

experiencing faults, such as loss of communication and pump control capabilities, false alarms, or

altered conﬁguration of the pumping stations.  The incident resulted in the release of nearly one

million liters of raw sewage into the river, local parks, and residential grounds. 500 meters of open

drain in a residential area were polluted.

Response and lessons learned

In March 2000, after monitoring and recording all signals, the investigators concluded that the

faults were caused by a human intervention.  A suspect was caught on April 23rd, 2000, having


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

in his possession a Compact 500 computer, a two-way radio, a laptop, a transformer, and cables.

The suspect had served as a site supervisor for Hunter Watertech until resigning due to unspeciﬁed

disagreements (with eﬀect from December 3rd, 1999).  He was sentenced to two years in jail and

ordered to pay $13,111 to the Council for the damage caused by the spill.  The sewage spill and

its impacts were cleaned up.  The process took days and required the deployment of substantial

resources.

The main hazard involved in this incident was the unauthorized access to the SCADA system,

which enabled the malevolent actor to release raw sewage into the surrounding environment. There

were no cybersecurity procedures,  policies,  or defenses present,  and the service contract was

deﬁcient or inadequate to handle the contractor’s responsibilities.  Considering that the attacker

was a former supervisor of the whole project, which controlled all pumping stations, the scale of

the impacts could have been more extensive. The attacker was indeed a skillful, insider adversary

with an intimate knowledge of the target system.  The adoption of the NIST SP 800-53 control

protocols(BodeauandGraubart2013)wouldhavearguablypreventedalloftheattacker’smalicious

activities.  A former employee’s access to the network, for example, should indeed be terminated

immediately.  (The sources used herein for this incident included District Court at Maroochydore

(2002), Abrams and Weiss (2008), and Sayfayn and Madnick (2017).)

2. Pennsylvania Water Filtering Plant, U.S., 2006

Incident

FBI suspected a security breach at a water treatment facility in Harrisburg,  PA, in 2006.

More speciﬁcally, it appeared that hackers planted a computer virus on the laptop computer of an

employee.  The hackers then used the infected laptop as an entry point, and installed a malicious

software on the plant’s computer system.  The hackers were reportedly operating outside the US.

The investigations further reported that the hackers did not appear to target the actual plant, but

merely intended to use the computer to distribute emails and other information.  It was reported

that the attack could have nevertheless aﬀected the normal operations of the plant. For example, it

could have altered the concentration levels of disinfectants in the potable water.


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

Response and lessons learned

The water utility eliminated remote access to the plant and changed all passwords.   In the

case of this speciﬁc attack, it should be noted that the entry point to the plant’s computer system

was an employee’s laptop.  Such weak links should always be avoided in the security chain.  Due

to the distributed nature of water infrastructure, staﬀ often resorts to remote access to connect

to key components and check system variables, such as tank water levels.   Separating SCADA

systems from administrative networks, which are connected to the internet, can decrease the risk

of adversary penetrations.  (The sources used herein for this incident included McMillan (2006),

USEPA (2008), McGurk (2008), and RISI (2019).)

3. Tehama-Colusa Canal, U.S., 2007

Incident

The Tehama-Colusa Canal Authority (TCAA) consists of 17 water contractors of the Central

Valley Project.   Its service area spans across the west side of the Sacramento Valley.   TCAA

operated two canals in 2007—the Tehama Colusa Canal and the Corning Canal—that provide

water for irrigation to a variety of permanent and annual crops in the local farms. Both canals are

owned by the federal government. In 2007, a former electrical supervisor at the TCCA was alleged

to have accessed and damaged the computer used to divert water from the Sacramento River to the

local farms.  Fortunately, the canals could still be operated manually.  In his role with TCCA, the

employee was responsible for the computer systems.

Response and lessons learned

The employee accessed the computer system around August 15th, 2007, and installed unau-

thorized software on the SCADA system.  He was an electrical supervisor with the authority and

responsible for computer systems. The intrusion costed the TCAA more than $5,000 in damages.

Theemployeewaseventuallychargedwithunauthorizedsoftwareinstallationandcomputerdamage

to divert water from the Sacramento River and sentenced to 10 years imprisonment and a ﬁne.

This incident is another case of insider attack. In this case, however, the insider was reportedly

still an active employee of the aﬀected entity at the time of the attack. (The sources used herein for


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

this incident included McMillan (2007), Weiss (2010), and RISI (2019).)

4. Illinois Water Plant Pump Station, U.S., 2011 (a false alarm incident)

Incident

In 2011, a pump burnout at an Illinois water plant was reported to be the result of a cyber-attack.

News of the suspected attack became public after a security expert obtained a report collected by the

Illinois Statewide Terrorism and Intelligence Center.  According to the report, a plant’s employee

noticed problems in the SCADA. In particular, the pump kept turning on and oﬀ and eventually

burnt out. The suspicions were raised in part due to the apparent connections to foreign IP addresses

in the log ﬁles. This news was circulated rapidly by several credible news agencies.

Response and lessons learned

The FBI and DHS launched an investigation.  DHS spokesman subsequently advised that “At

this time there is no credible corroborated data that indicates a risk to critical infrastructure entities

or a threat to public safety”.  According to the DHS, the pump had malfunctioned multiple times

during the recent years.  Additionally, the contractor with remote access to the computer system

was on a personal trip in Russia.  Investigation of the log ﬁles and interviews with the personnel

collectively concluded that the reported attack was a false alarm.

Interestingly, this false alarm was circulated extensively by some credible news agencies, such

as the Washington Post, causing anxiety and cry-wolf eﬀects. The issue could have been prevented

throughamoretimelyconsiderationoftheemployee’sinternationaltravelandpumpmalfunctioning

history. Another factor that likely contributed to the cry-wolf eﬀect was the public availability of a

preliminary report that anticipated the oﬃcial conclusion of the investigations. (The sources used

herein for this incident included Nakashima (2011) , Zetter (2011) , and Parish (2011).)

5. Key Largo Wastewater Treatment District, U.S., 2012

Incident

In2012, theformerChiefFinancialOﬃcer(CFO)ofFlorida’sKeyLargoWastewaterTreatment

District illegally accessed the district’s computer system to download emails and other personal



Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

documents. He performed these actions using the credentials of other employees, after the district

did not renew his contract.   He was arrested on account of felony charges, including computer

crime with intent to defraud, modify information without authority, and delete information from

the district’s computer system.

Response and lessons learned

The facility’s IT manager discovered emails addressed to the CFO’s personal email account

during a routine check of the email system. These emails were sent when the CFO was still working

at the facility but already informed that his contract was not going to be renewed. Upon discovery,

the IT manager informed the police, who then proceeded to arrest the CFO. The attack was limited

to the IT systems of the facility, with no other malicious activity or disruptions for the district’s

operations.

It is still not clear how the CFO got the credentials of his fellow employees. It is important for

employees to constantly update their passwords in order to reduce the risks associated with stolen

credentials.  The CFO used these credentials to access the system from home, suggesting that no

second authentication factor was needed to access the computer systems. Similarly to the ‘Kemuri

Water Company’ incident (Incident 8 below), a two-factor authentication could have prevented this

attack. The attack was discovered thanks to routine checks, which should always been performed

extensively for systems containing sensitive and conﬁdential data. (The sources used herein for this

incident included Goverment Technology (2012) and WPLG Inc (2012).)

6. Bowman Avenue Dam, U.S., 2013

Incident

The Bowman Avenue Dam is a small hydraulic infrastructure used to control ﬂoods in Blind

Brook creek (Rye, New York). A key component of the dam is a remotely-controllable sluice gate,

in operation since 2013, that controls the water ﬂow as a function of water levels and temperatures

in the creek.   Between August 28th  and September 18th, 2013, hackers obtained “unauthorized

remote access” to the SCADA system; a cyber-attack that allowed them to gather information on

water levels, temperature, and the status of the sluice gate.  The gate was manually disconnected


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

for maintenance at the time of the intrusion, so hackers could not have the opportunity of taking

direct control of the sluice gate.  The attack was perpetrated with the aid of Google dorking, a

computer hacking technique that leverages Google search engine to locate speciﬁc strings—and

thereby vulnerabilities—in web applications, such as the one used to monitor and control the sluice

gate.  The hacker’s action should not be classiﬁed as an intrusion, but rather as reconnaissance,

namely the ﬁrst stage of the CKC (see Figure 2a), in which the attacker just gathers information on

a potential target by looking for publicly available information on the Internet. The attacker used a

standalone PC of the dam’s system to access its control network.  However, at the time of attack,

the control system was only gathering water level information and storing it on a spreadsheet. “The

control system was attached to the Internet via a cellular modem but was directly Internet accessible

and not protected by a ﬁrewall or authentication access controls.”.

Response and lessons learned

Sincetheattack, anewsoftwareandanewsluicegatehavebeeninstalled. AtGovernorCuomo’s

direction, New York State has taken multiple steps to improve its cybersecurity capabilities across

several sectors.   The investigations carried out by the DHS and Justice Department resulted in

the indictment of a few state-sponsored hackers.  The attack caused over $30,000 in remediation

costs. Whilst this attack had no consequences on the security and reliability of the Bowman Avenue

Dam, it points to the vulnerabilities of critical water infrastructures, which are often monitored and

controlled through unsafe web applications. It is thus not completely surprising to observe that the

attack happened only two months after the intallation of an unsafe web application. (The sources

used herein for this incident included Cuomo (2016), Lach (2016), and Kutner (2016).)

7. Five water utilities, U.S., 2014

Incident

In the spring of 2014, ﬁve water utilities across three states in the U.S. experienced some

problems with their smart water meters.  In particular, they faced inaccurate water bills and the

deactivation of the Tower Gateway Base Stations (TGB), which receive signals from the water

meters and transfer them to centralized facilities for monitoring and billing purposes.  The ﬁrst


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

incident was reported by Kennebec Water District (Maine), where the utility could not connect to

the TGB. Other nine attacks were reported in Spotswood (New Jersey), Egg Harbor (New Jersey),

Aliquippa (Pennsylvania), and New Kensington (Pennsylvania).

The attack was caused by a ﬁred employee of the company that manufactured the smart water

meters—named company A in court’s documents—who gained unauthorized access to protected

computers.  More speciﬁcally, the employee used to work as a ﬁeld radio frequency engineer and

was ﬁred in November 2013.  A few weeks later, using his access to the base station network, he

conducted various malicious activities, such as changing the root passwords, modifying the TGB

radio frequency, and overwriting computer scripts.

Response and lessons learned

This abnormality drew the attention of the Federal government and caused investigations about

possible cyber-attacks against the water infrastructures. Since the attack disabled the communica-

tion between utilities and their data collection network, the organizations had to resume manual

data gathering. In addition, company A had to carry out forensic investigations at its own expenses

to identify the attacker, characterize the attacks, and ﬁnd and repair the damage.

Though the utilities suspected that the disgruntled employee could have accessed the systems

before May 2014, investigators could not link some anomalies to the attacker, since login details

were not recorded at that time. However, recorded logins showed multiple intrusions linked to the

IP address of the attacker’s home.  The attacker was indicted for several malicious activities, and

sentenced to prison and the payment of a ﬁne.

Eventhoughtheattackerwasnotaprofessionalhacker, adefaultpasswordallowedhimtoaccess

the TGB. This highlights the importance of implementing access control and revoking access rights

when someone is laid oﬀ. In addition, it is important to log and store in a safe place all logins and

user’s activities. If company A had kept track of log-ins earlier, investigators could have discovered

breaches dating prior to May 2014. This would have helped the investigations. (The sources used

herein for this incident included Department of Justice (2017), Cimpanu (2017), Vaas (2017), and

Gallagher (2017).)


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

8. Kemuri Water Company (a pseudonym), U.S., 2016

Incident

In 2016, an undisclosed water utility in the U.S. (presented under the pseudonym of Kemuri

Water Company) hired Verizon Security Solutions to perform a proactive cybersecurity assessment

of its water supply and metering system. A comprehensive assessment was subsequently conducted

on both its OT (distribution, control, and metering) and IT (personal and billing information of

the customers) systems.   The assessment revealed several high-risk vulnerabilities, including a

heavy reliance on outdated computers and operating systems. This included an outdated mid-range

computer system (AS400) system that served a number of critical OT and IT functions—including

the utility’s valve and ﬂow control application—and had direct connections to many networks.

The detection of these vulnerabilities triggered a full response and investigation.   A cross-

correlation of the utility’s internet traﬃc against a repository of known threat actors disclosed a

positive match with the IP addresses of state-sponsored hacktivists. Interviews were also conducted

with the utility’s staﬀ:  they revealed that some staﬀ members have been aware of possible unau-

thorized access to the systems as well as a series of unexplained valve manipulation patterns. This

casts doubt on whether the call for a forensic investigation was actually proactive and not reactive.

A physical survey revealed the presence of a wired connection between the utility’s internet

payment application and the AS400 system.   Since the AS400 was open to the internet, it was

concluded that access to the payment application would have also granted access to any information

stored in the AS400.  Collectively, the forensic investigations discovered an actual exploitation of

the internet-facingpayment application serverand the subsequentmanipulation of the utility’svalve

and ﬂow control application.  In synthesis, the incident resulted in the exﬁltration of 2.5 million

unique records and manipulation of chemicals and ﬂow rates.

Response and lessons learned

Access to and from the account management web front was terminated, and outbound connec-

tivity of the AS400 system was blocked immediately. Recommendations were made to replace the

antiquated systems with more modern versions.


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

Multiple exploitable vulnerabilities led to the breach, which could have led to more serious

consequences if the forensic investigation was not conducted earlier or the attackers had more

knowledge of the utility’s OT and IT systems.  Internet-facing servers and applications, such the

payment management application here, should not be connected to the SCADA. The utility had

relied on a single-factor authentication; this is not suﬃcient, and multi-factor authentication should

be used. Outdated systems, like the AS400 here, which formed a single point of failure, should not

be deployed, and installation of security patches should not be overlooked. Exﬁltration of records

went unnoticed for a long time and in large amounts. There should be a monitoring mechanism in

place that oversees the transfer of data to enable early detection and response.  (The sources used

herein for this incident included Verizon (2016) and Mahairas (2018).)

9. An undisclosed utility, U.S., 2016

Incident

In 2016, the system administrator of a small water utility noticed the emergence of suspicious

network traﬃc data.  In particular, the administrator found heavy network traﬃc originating from

the control panel of a pumping station.   This triggered the possibility of a cyber-attack and a

subsequent call to ICS-CERT. An oﬃcial investigation was promptly launched.

Response and lessons learned

The ICS-CERT was immediately provided with the data on the network conﬁguration. Address

white-lists were instituted. Together with a transition to non-standard ports, these actions enabled

safeguardingthenetworkwithoutrequiringtoputthecontrolinterfaceinoﬄinemode. Withinafew

days, ICS-CERT also collected forensics images of the network hardware. Reverse engineering of

themalwarewassubsequentlyperformedtodeterminetheattacker,breachpoint,datacompromised,

and mitigation strategy to prevent the same attack at other facilities. No details of the key ﬁndings

have been disclosed.

The situational awareness of the system administrator and prompt notiﬁcation of ICS-CERT

proved to be eﬀective in isolating and thwarting a potentially catastrophic intrusion.  Under the

CriticalInfrastructureInformationActof2002(CIIAct), DHShasestablishedtheProtectedCritical


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

Infrastructure Information (PCII) Program to assure the utilities that their submitted information

will not be disclosed. (The source used herein for this incident is ICS-CERT (2016a).)

10. An undisclosed drinking water utility, U.S., 2016

Incident

In late 2016, an American water authority noticed a 15,000% increase in their monthly cellular

data bills.  The authority was hacked between November 2016 and January 2017.  The utility had

seven Sixnet BT series cellular routers, which provided wireless access for monitoring the utility’s

pumping stations as well as a few other sites.   Four of these seven routers were compromised

by the hackers.   The hack was believed to be an opportunistic action to steal valuable internet

bandwidth, resulting in the the authority’s cellular data bill soaring from an average of $300 a

month to $45,000 in December 2016 and $53,000 in January 2017. However, the intrusion did not

damage the utility’s infrastructure and did not cause any physical harm.  The cause of the attack

may stand in the Sixnet BT Series Hard-coded Credentials Vulnerability (identiﬁed by the DHS

in May 2016).  A poorly-skilled hacker should indeed be able of exploiting this vulnerability by

hacking a factory-installed password. Sixnet produced patches and a new ﬁrmware to mitigate this

vulnerability.

Response and lessons learned

The use of hard-coded credentials by the routers manufacturer and failure of the water authority

to install the patches proved to be major contributors to this incident. (The sources used herein for

this incident included Walton (2017) and Jerome (2017).)

11. A regional water supplier, U.K., 2017

Incident

A regional water supplier was notiﬁed by several of its clients that their online account details

were changed. After the clients credential were reset, it emerged that the details of some registered

bank accounts were also changed, so that refunds issued to the customers were transferred fraud-

ulently to these new bank accounts.  In particular, the diverted refunds totaled over £500,000 and



Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

were directed to two bank accounts in England.  The banks holding these accounts were socially

engineered and allowed the holders to quickly transfer the majority of the funds to other bank

accounts in Dubai and the Bahamas.  Subsequently, these funds were used to purchase Bitcoins,

which were then transferred to addresses associated with a Bitcoin mixing service, thus preventing

any subject to be identiﬁed by following this trail further.

Response and lessons learned

The company initially notiﬁed its legal advisor about the data breach.   When the eﬀorts to

track down the bank account holders failed, the legal advisor contacted Verizon’s cybersecurity

experts, who started investigating in the company’s premises.  The experts proceeded to analyze

the systems and processes involved in managing the customers’ accounts.  After a due diligence

review of logs and web server revealed that no malicious software was present,  the Verizon

team suggested to interview personnel involved with customers’ accounts.  The interviews were

extended to various stakeholders, including a third-party call center in Mumbai (India), which

was responsible for administering the online accounts and processing telephone payments.  After

reviewing the Customer Relationship Management’s log ﬁles, the investigators were able to conﬁrm

that one employee had accessed all the accounts that were fraudulently refunded. In depth analysis

of the employee’s computers revealed that, despite the use of a data wiping software, he had sent

numerous email messages concerning the accounts aﬀected by the fraudulent activity to another

individual based in England.   When presented with this evidence, the suspected worker ﬁnally

confessed the crime and oﬀered assistance in identifying accounts with over £1,000 in refunds

stolen. The employee would take photographs of the account details and send them to his aide in

England, who would then create an online account or request a password reset. With the help of the

call center employee, new evidence was gathered, and authorities were able to secure a conviction

also for the aide.

This insider attack examined here suggests that management should also ensure that partners

having access to critical data perform stringent background checks on their employees. (The source

used herein for this incident is Verizon (2017).)


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

12. A European water utility, 2018

Incident

A European water utility with a cloud-based OT analytics system hired a critical infrastructure

security ﬁrm, Radiﬂow, to monitor its network. On January 21st, 2018, suspicious network traﬃc

was detected on the SCADA network. A series of new links to external IP addresses created a major

network topology change, which triggered several alerts. The destination IP addresses were looked

up, but this did not lead to any malicious site.  Further investigation revealed that the addresses

belonged to a “MinerCircle Monero Pool”. This led to the detection of crypto-mining malware in

the OT network of the water utility. The investigation classiﬁed nearly 40% of the traﬃc as related

to mining operations, causing a 60% surge in the overall bandwidth consumption. The investigation

found no attempts of manipulating the controller conﬁguration or sending commands.

Response and lessons learned

The security ﬁrm informed the water utility about the crypto-mining malware and infected

servers.  The recovery scheme included updating the anti-virus software on some servers as well

as tightening the ﬁrewall security. The updated anti-virus software was successful in detecting the

CoinMiner malware.

This incident is believed to be the ﬁrst known instance of cryptojacking—i.e., the unauthorized

useofacomputingresourcetoillicitlyminecryptocurrency—beingusedagainstanICS.Suspicious

network traﬃc was the clue that led to the detection of the cryptojacking in this incident. Besides

suspicious network traﬃc, high processor usage, sluggish response times, and overheating are some

symptoms of cryptojacking that can be monitored for early detection. (The sources used herein for

this incident included Radiﬂow (2018), Newman (2018), and Kerner (2018).)

13. Onslow Water and Sewer Authority, U.S., 2018

Incident

Onslow Water and Sewer Authority, a water utility company in Jacksonville (North Carolina)

was targeted by cyber-criminals in October of 2018. Timed right in the wake of Hurricane Florence,

the attack soon escalated into a sophisticated ransomware attack that locked out employees and


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

encrypted databases, leaving the utility with limited computing capabilities. The hack began with

persistent cyber-attacks through a virus known as EMOTET. With the EMOTET virus infection

persisting, the authority reached out to outside security experts to investigate and respond to the at-

tack. At approximately 3 am on Saturday October 13th, while the investigations were still underway,

the malware launched a more sophisticated virus known as RYUK. The IT team immediately dis-

connected the authority’s facilities from the internet. Nevertheless, the situation soon exacerbated

and the virus encrypted ﬁles and data.  The authority suspects that the attack has been a targeted

one because the hackers chose a target that was recently hit by a natural disaster.  Moreover, the

sophisticated virus was launched at 3 am on a Saturday—a time in which the authority was most

vulnerable.  The authority soon received one email from the cyber criminals demanding payment

to decrypt the damaged ﬁles and data.   The authority dismissed the oﬀer and stated it will not

“negotiate with criminals nor bow to their demands.”

Response and lessons learned

The authority has been working with the FBI, the DHS, the state of North Carolina, and multiple

security ﬁrms for remediation and recovery.  The authority also planned to rebuild its IT systems

from the ground up.

Theauthorityhadmultiplelayersofprotectioninplace,includingﬁrewallsandantivirus/malware

software, when the hackers struck. Yet, their IT system proven to be penetrable. Ransomware is the

fastest growing malware threat, targeting users of all types, according to the FBI. In this incident,

the utility decided not to pay a ransom. This is in accordance with the federal guidelines—the US

Government does not encourage paying a ransom to criminal actors. (The sources used herein for

this incident included ONWASA (2018) and Mahairas (2018).)

14. Fort Collins Loveland Water District, U.S., 2019

Incident

Fort Collins Loveland Water District serves customers in parts of Fort Collins,  Loveland,

Timnath, Windsor, and Larimer County (Colorado). On February 11th, 2019, the staﬀ of the Fort

Collins Loveland Water District and South Fort Collins Sanitation District were unable to access


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

technical data. Daily operations and customers’ data were not believed to have been compromised.

The utility had fallen victim to a ransomware cyber-attack.  The hackers demanded a ransom to

restore access (the amount of ransom payment demanded has not been disclosed to the public).

The district declined to pay the ransom.

Response and lessons learned

Within a few weeks, the district managed to unlock the data on its own. The decision on whether

or not to notify the customers about the hack was also a challenge. Eventually, it was decided not

to notify them, since the district did not store customers’ data. All payments were indeed handled

by a third-party vendor.

This is another case of ransomware attack in which the victim declined to pay a ransom. Data

segmentation and segregation proven to be a helpful practice in safeguarding sensitive customer

and daily operation data.  Hiring a third-party vendor to handle customer payments prevented the

customer data to be compromised.  The practice of hiring third-party vendors, however, creates

its own risks, as it was also manifested by Incident 11.  (The sources used herein for this incident

included Ferrier (2019) and Sobczak (2019).)

15. Riviera Beach Water Utility, U.S., 2019

Incident

On May 29th, 2019, Riviera Beach, a small city of 35,000 inhabitants located north of West

Palm Beach (Florida), was hit by a crippling ransomware attack after an employee of the police

department opened an infected email.   Paralyzing computer systems of the police department,

city council and other local government oﬃces, the ransomware sent all operations oﬄine and

encrypted their data.   The attack also spread to the water utility, compromising the computer

systems controlling pumping stations and water quality testing, as well as its payment operations.

Response and lessons learned

A few days after the attack, the city council unanimously voted to authorize its insurer to pay

65 bitcoins, approximately $600,000, to the attackers. The city would pay an additional $25,000 as



Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019

insurance deductibles out of its budget. Two weeks after the attack was disclosed, the IT department

could bring the city’s website and email services fully operational, while the water pump stations

and water quality testing systems were only partially available.  Although water quality sampling

had to be performed manually, the city council’s spokeswoman assured that water quality itself was

never in jeopardy. The FBI, Secret Service, and DHS investigated the attack and recommended the

city not to pay the ransom.  Regardless of paying the ransom, as of June 20th, 2019, the sensitive

data being encrypted by hackers were still inaccessible.

While waiting for the attackers to share a decryption key, the local government authorized

spending more than $900,000 to buy new computer hardware—purchases which were planned for

next year. According to a councilperson, most of the existing hardware was old and outdated, which

made it vulnerable to the cyber-attack. In addition, the city’s computer network was not updated,

and patches were not installed on time.

It is known that local governments and small public utilities are less prepared for cyber-attacks,

since they lack the budget and professionals needed to secure their IT and OT systems.   That

said, basic cybersecurity training raises awareness, and reduces the possibility of succumbing to

devastating attacks unleashed by the naivety of uninformed employees, such as the case for Riviera

Beach. Although paying a ransom looks like the easiest way to solve the problem, FBI and security

experts suggest never to pay ransom as it only encourages future criminal activity.   Preventing

cyber-attacks from happening is always the best practice. (The sources used herein for this incident

included Doris (2019), Mazzei (2019), and O’Donnell (2019).)


DISCUSSION

As outlined in the previous section, the complexity of cyber-incidents in WWS has increased

during the last two decades. In some earlier incidents, such as the 2000 Maroochy Water Services

hack, an insider simply and directly gained access to the OT controllers and performed malicious

activities, while in some recent attacks, such the 2016 Kemuri Water Company hack, several IT

and OT workstations were compromised by outsiders using multi-step attack techniques.  In this

section, we review and analyze some key points of the aforementioned incidents from both attacker


Hassanzadeh September 11, 2019
